Caption: without any more from me please a very
Caption: very warm welcome / thank you Alex and
Caption: thank you for coming along everybody
Caption: there's lots of competition today so
Caption: it's great to see you here now my talk
Caption: understanding functional programming in
Caption: 40 minutes you see there it's understand
Caption: not learn not be able to program in 40
Caption: minutes and understanding is quite
Caption: varied but I have some money here we
Caption: need it
Caption: so I feel a bit like Harry Houdini today
Caption: I have the great Harry Houdini well I'm
Caption: not great I'm not Harry Houdini but I
Caption: feel like have to perform some magic
Caption: because as you know functional
Caption: programming has this feeling about being
Caption: hard and this is a comic slide we have
Caption: here in Haskell this is what you need to
Caption: know to do hello world well yeah the
Caption: actual reality of the situation is quite
Caption: different
Caption: right this is hello world in Haskell and
Caption: it looks very similar to Python or other
Caption: languages you can write it quite short
Caption: so again I'm not here to teach you how
Caption: school I'm not here to teach you
Caption: programming I'm teaching here to try and
Caption: help you understand function programming
Caption: there's some key concepts and ideas that
Caption: I think will help you understand that
Caption: there's not too much to it but there's a
Caption: lot of slides it's the last session in
Caption: the day but I'm going to work very hard
Caption: and I hope you will work hard too to
Caption: understand the functional programming
Caption: it's not an easy session we're gonna go
Caption: quite fast like flying through some
Caption: landscape and having a look from higher
Caption: above but if you work out hopefully
Caption: we'll learn something and get through
Caption: this together so you came to understand
Caption: functional programming really are you
Caption: keen okay let's go probably two seconds
Caption: there we go sorry
Caption: start off with the introduction and
Caption: overview I won't look at the
Caption: fundamentals of functional programming
Caption: intermediate functional programming and
Caption: then advanced functional programming and
Caption: after the talk if you're giving an
Caption: indication maybe if you see me where you
Caption: got up to I got down a fundamental or I
Caption: got to intermediate or I got to advanced
Caption: there would be some good feedback along
Caption: the way it does get harder a little bit
Caption: about myself I have a PhD in computer
Caption: science and software engineering that is
Caption: focused on AI I've worked in academia
Caption: and industry for only 20 years and so
Caption: forth with two consulting companies one
Caption: called running co-productions which
Caption: focused on software development and
Caption: professional training another one now
Caption: more recently innovate lis which focuses
Caption: on corporate innovation and startup
Caption: innovation and these are my areas of
Caption: focus at current some sponsors of course
Caption: we wouldn't be here today with the IRS
Caption: so thank you very much to them please
Caption: support them and visit their boos so
Caption: warning this talk may contain strong
Caption: language that may be offensive to some
Caption: developments we're going to mention the
Caption: f-word I'm going to mention the M word
Caption: okay so these are things you I'm sorry
Caption: close your ears or whatever but you've
Caption: been warned before we get into the
Caption: actual functional content I want to
Caption: review a couple of points which you
Caption: probably know about but just to make
Caption: sure for people who haven't heard of
Caption: these things what is a programming
Caption: paradigm it's just an approach to
Caption: programming and there are many different
Caption: programming paradigms different
Caption: approaches we tend to break them down
Caption: into two big groups
Caption: the imperative group and the declarative
Caption: group the imperative group says that
Caption: will tell the computer what to do like
Caption: baking a cake do this and do this and do
Caption: that you do that and change this and run
Caption: statements and so forth the declarative
Caption: approach of which functional programming
Caption: is a member tries to say this is what I
Caption: want you work out how to do it so it's
Caption: not as much prescriptive as this 50
Caption: declarative as the name suggests there
Caption: are other functional for us are a
Caption: declarative program languages like logic
Caption: programming but functional programming
Caption: is by far the most popular these days
Caption: and also another concept in programming
Caption: is this first of enables versus supports
Caption: so you can have a programming language
Caption: which enables a particular approach to
Caption: programming that just means you can do
Caption: it all right now most of these language
Caption: is a turing-complete so you can do
Caption: anything anything
Caption: does it help pretty much but some
Caption: programming languages support that
Caption: programming paradigm that means they
Caption: have programming constructs and
Caption: everything to do to try and help you do
Caption: that paradigm that's one concept to
Caption: remember we'll come back to later on the
Caption: second concept of this idea of pure pure
Caption: versus hybrid some programming languages
Caption: are pure they just do one paradigm and
Caption: the programming language is trying to do
Caption: multiple paradigms like C++ or Java
Caption: these days you know oh and a bit of
Caption: functional here and there where is the
Caption: Haskell language is a pure functional
Caption: language who tries to just do a
Caption: functional very well there's pros and
Caption: there disadvantages against both of
Caption: these approaches
Caption: okay so let's get to the basics here the
Caption: fundamentals of functional programming
Caption: now I'm hoping do you look like a techy
Caption: audience that this is what you probably
Caption: already know but just in case some
Caption: people here don't know much about these
Caption: things I'll start from scratch about
Caption: functional programming remember back to
Caption: your days in the high school or
Caption: university he did functions
Caption: you drew wraps and we drew it through
Caption: stuff like y equals x plus 3 and we get
Caption: a line over here and your work if you
Caption: wanted to describe that function these
Caption: notes that function which goes through
Caption: the real numbers to the real numbers and
Caption: here's the definition of the function
Caption: and I can evaluate the function at a
Caption: particular and you know the thing about
Caption: a function which is quite unique is for
Caption: every value of the variable X you only
Caption: get one value of the function the one
Caption: particular input you always get the same
Caption: output that's what sort of defines a
Caption: function in mathematics
Caption: so hopefully you remember this sort of
Caption: stuff yeah ok so what is functional
Caption: programming well at its essence
Caption: functional programming is just
Caption: programming with the computational
Caption: equivalent of these functions well just
Caption: wanting him down and doing the math by
Caption: hand we have now a computer to calculate
Caption: the functional values pure functional
Caption: programming means just using fewer
Caption: functions nothing else
Caption: neither object-oriented or procedural
Caption: type stuff in pure functional
Caption: programming means you may do stuff
Caption: that's in the old way of doing things
Caption: not purely functional approach so your
Caption: functions may not just return one value
Caption: they may do other things as well so a
Caption: couple of distinctions to think about is
Caption: to go through the port there so here's
Caption: some a bit more details about the
Caption: programming type of functions these
Caption: actually things you will see in the
Caption: Haskell programming language now I'm not
Caption: using how still I'm using like a pseudo
Caption: code to try to make it a bit more
Caption: clearer but in Haskell you'll write
Caption: something like I'm going to find a
Caption: function f which goes from float
Caption: deployed same as the mass you define
Caption: your function by saying f of X equals x
Caption: plus 3 same as the net
Caption: Haskell tries to make it simpler by
Caption: allowing you to leave out the brackets
Caption: and just put f space X and sometimes you
Caption: can even just leave out the name of the
Caption: function just write X those whatever it
Caption: is we can apply the function in a
Caption: similar way and we have similar concepts
Caption: we go further in functional
Caption: to allow things like generic functions
Caption: if you could see here in this function
Caption: definition of G it looks like there's
Caption: variables well they are available but
Caption: they're variable types if you see a
Caption: lowercase letter in the type you know
Caption: function definition it means a variable
Caption: type rather than a variable value down
Caption: here in the function definition you
Caption: might have books you might have the
Caption: variables and the other variable as a
Caption: parameter or value for that function
Caption: notice here that functions can have
Caption: multiple parameters and we can write
Caption: these in a number of different ways
Caption: pastel users this way but we'll use this
Caption: middle way it shows you it takes two
Caption: parameters one is a float one is the
Caption: string and it returns a float value okay
Caption: so a simple definition of a function
Caption: which has some inputs and produces an
Caption: output in mathematics we may actually
Caption: use this notation which is called the
Caption: cross-product and we'll come back to
Caption: that a little bit later on as well so
Caption: before we go I just want to show you
Caption: what a couple of castel programs look
Caption: like when it doesn't go into these
Caption: details but on the side here you see a
Caption: Fibonacci numbers program little
Caption: definition and function looks like
Caption: mathematics of what kubinashi numbers
Caption: are and you call it here to calculate
Caption: the Fibonacci numbers over here we have
Caption: a very short function for doing the aim
Caption: Queens problem which is a board problem
Caption: with the Queens on the chess board quite
Caption: short and definitions of things not long
Caption: and complex and procedural but a
Caption: functional program that's pretty much
Caption: all we'll see a program today they look
Caption: more conceptual topics so when we talk
Caption: about functions applying functions I'm
Caption: going to use some notation where I use
Caption: this sort of arrow here to show you it's
Caption: a function and as the name suggests this
Caption: is an add three function so it adds
Caption: three to integral as you can see here if
Caption: we put three or two into the function we
Caption: apply it and now the other end comes by
Caption: the notation for that is just what you'd
Caption: expect down here you're calling that you
Caption: get two down you out interestingly we
Caption: can now take that value five and put it
Caption: into the function again and three again
Caption: and that will give us the answer eight
Caption: what we can do we like to do a lot of in
Caption: functional programming it's one of the
Caption: key points is functional composition so
Caption: make these two functions into a new
Caption: function and we can write it like the
Caption: which says we've got a new function
Caption: combining adds three and add three and
Caption: yeah when you call that function with
Caption: two is the input you get eight on the
Caption: outside so that's functional application
Caption: and functional composition some basic
Caption: concepts now the key thing I mentioned
Caption: before was that functions are pure that
Caption: means they don't affect things outside
Caption: the function and the functions can't
Caption: depend on anything outside the function
Caption: so for example when you put this two and
Caption: get the five out there can be nothing
Caption: which is sneaking in like this this
Caption: depend this function can't depend on
Caption: anything outside the function and I
Caption: can't return anything outside the
Caption: function you can only come from the
Caption: function results and the inputs are
Caption: where you get the things you can return
Caption: this is called referential transparency
Caption: or it results in referential
Caption: transparency in functional programming
Caption: we focus on expressions and value
Caption: wherever you see an expression you can
Caption: evaluate parts of that expression and
Caption: replace those parts by the value and the
Caption: function and the program shouldn't
Caption: change at all if there's nothing else
Caption: can happen outside this calculation of
Caption: the answer so referential transparency
Caption: is a key feature of functional payment
Caption: languages that are pure and we like that
Caption: approach now here's an example just
Caption: again make it clear this is an
Caption: old-fashioned procedure you might write
Caption: here's my procedure it does some inputs
Caption: and outputs calculates and values hasn't
Caption: got a return value and if you have a
Caption: look at this function and try and work
Caption: things out you will see it's getting
Caption: valued from global variables it's
Caption: writing things to the output it's
Caption: reading from the input it's crazy to
Caption: understand what this function is doing
Caption: unless you look inside and know pretty
Caption: much the global scope of your program
Caption: this is traditional approach with the
Caption: functional approach as I mentioned over
Caption: here we have a clear demarcation the
Caption: inputs come into the function it does
Caption: some calculation and the output comes
Caption: out so it's very clear that something
Caption: comes in something comes out you don't
Caption: have to look around to point out what's
Caption: happening we'll know what's happening
Caption: inside the definition that function
Caption: tells you what it will do inside the
Caption: function and that is all it does we call
Caption: this a pure function and we say it has
Caption: no side effects
Caption: these cabal the
Caption: pure and they have side effects so
Caption: procedural functioning which you've
Caption: probably done y'know type stuff it's
Caption: based around the use of statements so
Caption: you have an if statement or a for-loop
Caption: statement or an assignment statement and
Caption: it's basically about manipulating state
Caption: in a procedural sort of way as I
Caption: mentioned a big thing about procedural
Caption: programs is being easily able to write
Caption: loops on the other side as I mentioned
Caption: functional programs are based around
Caption: expressions and evaluating those
Caption: expressions an expression may contain
Caption: values not a function calls when you
Caption: call those functions they evaluate
Caption: expressions and other function report
Caption: but all about expressions and values and
Caption: they focus more on recursion rather than
Caption: the loops and so forth so when you teach
Caption: for us to teach procedural programming
Caption: you start off with four moons and
Caption: recursions an advanced topic when you
Caption: teach functional programming you start
Caption: off the recursion and for loops in an
Caption: advanced topic so a different a paradigm
Caption: a different approach to programming so
Caption: the benefits of this pure functional
Caption: programming are great there are many and
Caption: this is why people are interested in it
Caption: first of all it makes our programs
Caption: easier to reason about because it's not
Caption: this global mess of values and State
Caption: thing change it makes debugging and
Caption: maintenance easier it makes higher level
Caption: abstractions so there's less details to
Caption: think about if you just know the high
Caption: level abstractions shorter and better
Caption: structured programs easier to test and
Caption: importantly here it makes parallel or
Caption: concurrent programming a lot easier
Caption: because there's not shared variable
Caption: state you've all got separate values you
Caption: can process we can calculate the results
Caption: of functions but there are some
Caption: disadvantages of functional programming
Caption: to be honest I think because it's a
Caption: different paradigm there's a steep
Caption: learning curve there's lots of
Caption: terminology there's lots of notation and
Caption: there's also
Caption: high-level abstractions you need to
Caption: learn and we'll talk about some of these
Caption: in the talk but we'll get back to this
Caption: now now if you've got a functional
Caption: programming language like Pascal or some
Caption: of the other functional work languages
Caption: like f-sharp what sort of things do they
Caption: provide to support functional
Caption: programming
Caption: well the big thing is that functions
Caption: must be first-class entities this means
Caption: wherever you could have a value or a
Caption: result or integer or floating-point or
Caption: string you can now also have a value
Caption: sorry a function so functions can be
Caption: parameters to other functions and
Caption: functions can be returned values from
Caption: other functions functions are first
Caption: class entities inside your program I
Caption: mentioned the expression by syntax I
Caption: mentioned the competition composition
Caption: immutability we'll talk about how to
Caption: break data types we'll talk about and my
Caption: concepts as well this is a nice chart
Caption: you can see in Wikipedia that we go into
Caption: details but it shows a number of the
Caption: pure functional programming languages
Caption: you can pure ones and what features they
Caption: share and don't ship so check it out on
Caption: Wikipedia if you want to compare your
Caption: functional programming language with
Caption: other ones so as I mentioned there's a
Caption: spectrum here of some programs that
Caption: support functional programming language
Caption: and others which really just enable it
Caption: make it possible for example down here
Caption: an assembler and seal and you can do
Caption: functional programming you can do oo but
Caption: you've got to do it all yourself up here
Caption: Pascal and closure and a camel and Scala
Caption: they have structures in the language to
Caption: support functional programming and make
Caption: it easier for you so of course we put
Caption: two of these when we're doing functional
Caption: programming so how are they lost anybody
Caption: or you still with me who's still with me
Caption: yes what you would be I think you
Caption: probably know all this stuff so let's
Caption: get on now to the intermediate
Caption: functional programming concepts these
Caption: are what you may already know thank you
Caption: I don't know who's here but we'll see
Caption: how we go
Caption: the first one is the idea of algebraic
Caption: data types and it sounds very
Caption: complicated you break data types not to
Caption: be confused with abstract data types
Caption: algebraic data types the name comes from
Caption: algebra meaning addition and
Caption: multiplication that's all this but what
Caption: it really means is when we define a data
Caption: type here's a data type customer we're
Caption: saying customer contains a string and
Caption: integer in a boolean that's like the
Caption: cross-product of a straight all the
Caption: string values and all the integer values
Caption: and all the boolean value
Caption: so there's our multiplication and on the
Caption: other side when you define an algebraic
Caption: data type in a functional programming
Caption: language like data is a point you can
Caption: say this point could be a floating point
Caption: with float values or it could be an
Caption: integer point with integer values so
Caption: it's a or b or the Union he comes our
Caption: attitude SP so that's why they call
Caption: algebraic data types just because they
Caption: have those two aspects when you define a
Caption: data type now be clear these data types
Caption: are not like object oriented classes
Caption: they call these things the type
Caption: constructor and they call these things
Caption: the data constructor but there's no
Caption: constructor you write they just build an
Caption: area in memory with these data items and
Caption: the compiler doesn't put that for you
Caption: you have to say how it does it but they
Caption: do allow recursive data types here we're
Caption: defining a list in terms of a list or a
Caption: tree in terms of a tree you can have
Caption: what are called Mallory types which
Caption: don't take any values and just set
Caption: values and you can also use a nice
Caption: syntax which it looks a bit like a
Caption: structure or a class forget it's not
Caption: it's just a data type and algebraic data
Caption: type so don't confuse these with oh okay
Caption: these are very important in that you
Caption: know I will talk about today so keep
Caption: those in mind
Caption: I meant another big point is
Caption: immutability immutability is not saying
Caption: you can't change things you can't have
Caption: changed it just says you can't change
Caption: things that you've already assigned so
Caption: for example here once something to
Caption: initialize we can't change it here's
Caption: list a we set it to be a particular list
Caption: we can tap into that list but we can
Caption: come over here and create a new list
Caption: list P which is list a appending on
Caption: something to it now you may say this is
Caption: pretty inefficient if every time we
Caption: change something we have to create a new
Caption: list but don't worry I believe that
Caption: covers the compiler makes sure it shares
Caption: lots of stuff because these values never
Caption: changed the first part of this list is
Caption: going to be shared with this list
Caption: because this mirror gets changed so it
Caption: is quite at issue
Caption: sometimes the performance is not as good
Caption: as though if you change it but we can
Caption: get around that problem as well
Caption: so immutability is a very important part
Caption: of functional programming
Caption: so functional programming we have things
Caption: like in our polymorphic functions as you
Caption: see here we're defining a linked
Caption: function everywhere I said you define a
Caption: function it takes a list of two square
Caption: brackets in a list we have a lowercase
Caption: thing here that means it's a variable
Caption: type and it returns a value in an
Caption: integer the length of that list
Caption: luckily the length function doesn't need
Caption: to know what that type is so it works
Caption: but anytime we can define the length of
Caption: an empty list as being zero and the
Caption: length of a list with a head and the
Caption: tail as being one plus plus the length
Caption: of the tail so as I say it doesn't
Caption: matter whether that list is two integers
Caption: or three characters they both work fine
Caption: but notice here you can't have
Caption: heterogeneous lists you can't have a
Caption: list with six and a character and we'll
Caption: talk more about that at the end when we
Caption: talk about real world applications so we
Caption: have polymorphic functions now the first
Caption: really big concept that you have to
Caption: really understand it's not too hard is
Caption: the idea of flat classes so you think of
Caption: the word class it brings to the mind oh
Caption: oh but don't think about our these are
Caption: classes of types so here we talk about
Caption: datatypes we're saying is the class of
Caption: data type which is similar in some way
Caption: how are they similar well a client class
Caption: defines functions that must be
Caption: implemented for that data type it is
Caption: going to be a member of this class that
Caption: sounds very familiar to me it sounds
Caption: like interfaces if your data type has
Caption: these functions as an interface set data
Caption: type then we'll say they are part of
Caption: this particular type class if you define
Caption: so think of type class is just being
Caption: interface for data types so if you have
Caption: a look here I've defined a type class
Caption: type class a which has actually a
Caption: variable type in there then I say it
Caption: needs to have these two functions so now
Caption: if I want my particular type my data
Caption: type to be in that type class I have to
Caption: make sure it defines those two functions
Caption: and then we say that that data type is
Caption: in these type class this class of types
Caption: okay
Caption: alright and here's an example over here
Caption: which you can look through that I won't
Caption: do too much in detail a couple of
Caption: incidents of if the client is type class
Caption: up here define it for integers we've
Caption: defined it for boolean we've also
Caption: defined it for my data type so you can
Caption: define any data type you want will now
Caption: allow those functions to be used
Caption: so these type class is important for
Caption: many many reasons
Caption: the first one is they'll a allow ad hoc
Caption: polymorphism you've probably heard of
Caption: you know mission OOW
Caption: polymorphism dynamic binding and so
Caption: forth well this allows a form of debt
Caption: where it doesn't matter how the types
Caption: are related as long as that you provide
Caption: that interface they implement those
Caption: functions then we can actually use him
Caption: in an algorithm so if I had those two
Caption: functions previously implemented on my
Caption: types I can write an algorithm using
Caption: those two types those two functions and
Caption: it doesn't matter what type it is as
Caption: long as the type implements those two
Caption: functions that's the definition of ad
Caption: hoc polymorphism if the type implements
Caption: the interface then we can write
Caption: algorithms using the interface
Caption: independent what the type is and there's
Caption: no relationship between these types
Caption: they're not like subclasses of an
Caption: inheritance tree or that sort of stuff
Caption: they just implement the interface and
Caption: there's an example down here using show
Caption: ok so that seems pretty good so far but
Caption: houston we have a problem and the
Caption: problem is really really get to see how
Caption: functional programming really shines
Caption: what is this problem the problems is
Caption: sometimes we talked about those side
Caption: effects as being bad but sometimes we
Caption: absolutely need those side effects we
Caption: can't live without them
Caption: for example input an output is a
Caption: side-effect if your function writes
Caption: something out or read something in it's
Caption: not a queue of function how can we live
Caption: in a world which we want pure functional
Caption: programming for me I want to have side
Caption: effects what are some examples of side
Caption: effects we might like well as I
Caption: mentioned you may have exceptional
Caption: circumstances you have an exception in
Caption: your function you can't throw an
Caption: exception
Caption: because that would be a side effect
Caption: something the function does not just
Caption: produce an output it's its result what
Caption: do you want to ask functions to append
Caption: to along or do input an output we want
Caption: our function to change its behavior
Caption: based upon some configuration we've
Caption: given to it global configuration sort of
Caption: dependency injection what we wanted to
Caption: change and use global state sometimes
Caption: you really like to use states we
Caption: couldn't do that what if you want to
Caption: have a return a random value think of a
Caption: function that returns of a random value
Caption: that's the absolute opposite of a
Caption: function and function always returns the
Caption: same value for its inputs a random value
Caption: breaks that rule completely but of
Caption: course we'd like to have random values
Caption: random number generators in our programs
Caption: so how do we do this how can we get
Caption: around this limitation here's an example
Caption: of the first one about exceptional
Caption: circumstances how will be this function
Caption: up here at square root be put in a
Caption: normal way to just 16 or so we'll get
Caption: back for what happens when you put in
Caption: minus 1/2 this square root function okay
Caption: we're not talking about complex numbers
Caption: it doesn't know what to do it would
Caption: usually throw something like an
Caption: exception sorry maybe no it doesn't
Caption: really but you could do this something's
Caption: going wrong we don't know how to do this
Caption: for our function but of course this
Caption: would be a side-effect
Caption: we don't want to do that so the question
Caption: is can we preserved pure functional
Caption: programming but handle these sort of
Caption: situations let's see what we can do the
Caption: way we handle this is to introduce a
Caption: data type called maybe in other
Caption: languages they call it option and other
Caption: things as well the data type maybe says
Caption: maybe data type of an integer or a
Caption: floating point or a string can just be a
Caption: string or it can be nothing so your data
Caption: type it's an additive data type says
Caption: this may be thing can be a result or it
Caption: can be nothing sort of like a null and
Caption: now you see on here you see how we can
Caption: define this function safe square root it
Caption: takes a floating-point number but now
Caption: rather than returning a quote it returns
Caption: a maybe a point if you call it with a
Caption: number which is greater than 0 then you
Caption: just get
Caption: the square effect so it's 16 gets square
Caption: root 4 but it's wrapped inside this just
Caption: data type if you call with minus 1 you
Caption: can get back nothing
Caption: ah something went wrong I couldn't get a
Caption: result in the function so these may be
Caption: data types are a way of getting around
Caption: the problem of needing exceptional
Caption: circumstances in functions just to show
Caption: you how things will happen here cameras
Caption: 16 we put it into safe square root let
Caption: me get out a data type containing or
Caption: just caught we put in minus 1 we get out
Caption: of data type nothing and then our
Caption: program can check if it's nothing can do
Caption: something so I simply went wrong you
Caption: shouldn't use negative numbers if it
Caption: doesn't get a nothing you can say oh I
Caption: get the value out of here this is the
Caption: correct value for the program so this is
Caption: now a pure function again all it has is
Caption: inputs all it has is the outputs but it
Caption: handles this case you want to handle it
Caption: exceptional circumstances the programmer
Caption: can check as I say and do appropriate
Caption: things so I've got around a little
Caption: problem and maintained our purity of
Caption: function this idea of a value in a
Caption: context is very important you can think
Caption: about these contexts as being like a
Caption: data type but really they're a
Caption: programming context there are
Caption: computational contexts and we'll get
Caption: back to that so here's a list a list is
Caption: a context where there are values inside
Caption: that list here is an error that's a
Caption: context there's an error message in
Caption: there and here's a maybe with a value
Caption: inside it 5 that probably could be
Caption: justify the idea so these are examples
Caption: of contexts which have functions that
Caption: work on these data types to process the
Caption: data at the values in different contexts
Caption: that's a very important point so here's
Caption: the next problem we have to face in
Caption: functional programming we want to try
Caption: and you want to try and take our just
Caption: two just two and feed it into our add
Caption: three function we want it's nothing
Caption: thing in 3 D 3 R 3 as well but we can't
Caption: do that because remember the add 3
Caption: function it took an integer and returns
Caption: an integer doesn't like to take maybes
Caption: okay so when you can apply it images it
Caption: works fine when you try and apply it to
Caption: just two or nothing it doesn't know what
Caption: to do so how can we fix this problem and
Caption: have functions take normal values but
Caption: still work when you've got values inside
Caption: of context well the way we can do this
Caption: is create a function let's call it f map
Caption: and that function now takes two
Caption: parameters the function itself
Caption: remember functions to be parameters and
Caption: the actual value inside a context so
Caption: when you look at my slides here I'll
Caption: have a graphic display this is people
Caption: who just want to watch the concepts and
Caption: there's some code down here if you want
Caption: to try line up with the code but you
Caption: don't have to you can just stay up here
Caption: and some description if you want to so
Caption: this function f map takes in the
Caption: function 1/2 takes you to just a and
Caption: gives out a just for this function here
Caption: also can take in the punch in half and
Caption: nothing and give out nothing so it's
Caption: able to handle these situations where by
Caption: the function f 1/2 expects a normal
Caption: value but something comes wrapped in a
Caption: context so what does f nap do basically
Caption: it's not very hard F map just comes
Caption: along it sees just ate it takes the
Caption: value out of just ate it applies the
Caption: value to the function has been passed
Caption: huh gets the result and then puts it
Caption: back inside a context so that's all F
Caption: map does but this F map is defined just
Caption: for this particular data type the maybe
Caption: type if you have a list that you're
Caption: going to put nearly the difference if
Caption: map function so we can have a lot of
Caption: different as map functions and these
Caption: ethnic functions define a type class
Caption: this is the F word functor functor is a
Caption: type class which implements the s map
Caption: function or that type class and down
Caption: here we define it we say the type class
Caption: functor it works with any data type
Caption: either going for it and it must have a
Caption: function called F map which takes a
Caption: function that's the half function and
Caption: take some fake something wrapped up in a
Caption: context a list or a maybe
Caption: and it produces a result wrapped up in
Caption: that same context just as we showed you
Caption: in the slide before so F Mac helps us
Caption: get around this problem I showed you the
Caption: implementation of F map for this is
Caption: saying I've got an instance above a type
Caption: called maybe which implements the
Caption: functor and here it is implementing F
Caption: map for maybe you can also do the same
Caption: thing for other titles like lists I
Caption: mentioned list was a container so he
Caption: can't pass a list skin because add three
Caption: doesn't know how to work with lists but
Caption: if we define an X map function it make
Caption: map can take the value data lists apply
Caption: the function put them back into a list
Caption: so we can make sure that the list data
Caption: type is a part of the type class functor
Caption: that means the list data type just
Caption: implements ethnic so the data type is a
Caption: part of the type class the class of
Caption: types which implement the F map function
Caption: so it's a mouthful there but hopefully
Caption: you can get your head around that okay
Caption: so we can define this type class and
Caption: I'll meet you got a list unit and
Caption: they've got other class as well so the
Caption: question is why do we need these things
Caption: called functors well hopefully I gave
Caption: you a little the example there but just
Caption: to reiterate it allows us to apply
Caption: functions to values in different
Caption: contexts without us having to do all the
Caption: work is taking it ourselves the egg map
Caption: does it for us because the F map knows
Caption: about the lists or the F map knows about
Caption: the maybe it also saves us from having
Caption: to write mapping functions which do
Caption: things for all the elements and now we
Caption: can write algorithms that use F map and
Caption: that will work with any data type that
Caption: implements F Lee so we're writing higher
Caption: level abstractions we don't care what
Caption: data type it is as long as it implements
Caption: F map it'll work with our algorithm so
Caption: to get high level abstractions we can
Caption: use over and over again in our programs
Caption: so there are many functions many
Caption: functors that is data types that you
Caption: main ethnic so again this is a bit of a
Caption: time for reflection just think back
Caption: bumpers basically applying a function to
Caption: a value in a context using f map to
Caption: return the result in context okay so how
Caption: we going they're still boring mates
Caption: getting complex but functors are not too
Caption: hard to worry about I think so now we're
Caption: going to advanced functional programming
Caption: which may be probably I hope you don't
Caption: already know about otherwise you
Caption: probably know functional programming now
Caption: the problem that advises to motivate
Caption: this part of the talk is what happens if
Caption: we have our function add three maybe so
Caption: it can handle the result is an exception
Caption: to producer maybe rather than just
Caption: producing the result so we've put in two
Caption: we get just five but now we want to put
Caption: that into our next function here add 3
Caption: to get just eight but wait a sec this
Caption: add three function expects an integer
Caption: like two or five and here we've only got
Caption: a justified so they won't work together
Caption: we can't compose our functions this is a
Caption: problem in not compatible for composing
Caption: and composition is a core element of
Caption: functional programming you want to be
Caption: able to do that so how can we get around
Caption: this problem so we do the same sort of
Caption: thing let's create a function pull it
Caption: bind to apply a function to the maybe so
Caption: apply a function to a maybe that doesn't
Caption: usually apply to a maybe so here's a
Caption: function over here add three maybe which
Caption: produces a maybe but it doesn't usually
Caption: apply to a maybe and now we could
Caption: actually pass in a maybe just two and by
Caption: intima do all the magic to make sure it
Caption: takes the value out puts it into this
Caption: one gets the answer not too complex so
Caption: the bind function takes a value inside a
Caption: data type like maybe and a function that
Caption: which uses that value and produces a new
Caption: value of that data type this is the bind
Caption: function well this is basically the idea
Caption: of ammonium not very complex a monad is
Caption: just basically a type class
Caption: which defines a bind function now there
Caption: are some more detailed and weaving out
Caption: here that's a general important part
Caption: it's a set of data types that implements
Caption: one function called bind which allow
Caption: them to do this little trick that's what
Caption: we mean by a monad right class so I
Caption: showed you the maybe example of this but
Caption: we've also do the same thing for list a
Caption: list is a data type which has some value
Caption: in a context we want to apply a function
Caption: called replicate which replicates the
Caption: elements in a list but it doesn't apply
Caption: to these types so bind will do the work
Caption: for us
Caption: it'll take the type they are the values
Caption: out here replicate them put them back
Caption: into a list so we replicate one we get
Caption: two lines replicate two we get two
Caption: things so as you can see only here's the
Caption: definition of the monad instance this
Caption: it's implementing that interface
Caption: function called bind for the list data
Caption: type it's as simple as that
Caption: monads are a track class with a bind
Caption: interface if you want to be a part of
Caption: that class if you want to be am on air
Caption: the list monad all you have to do
Caption: basically is implement that mind that
Caption: buying function so this is the main big
Caption: class and hit again you implements that
Caption: function so this and maybe our examples
Caption: of focus but also examples of monads so
Caption: it sounds very technical here but let's
Caption: see why is this useful well here's an
Caption: example processing some code to find in
Caption: a family tree grandparents if I want to
Caption: find both grandfathers of someone then
Caption: you have to look up the family tree and
Caption: maybe our family tree isn't complete we
Caption: don't know who the grandfather of
Caption: theories or who uses so we have to make
Caption: sure that our program handles missing
Caption: persons they may be there they may not
Caption: be there so bring by our code to walk up
Caption: this tree and find the father of the
Caption: father and
Caption: you'll find that your code will have
Caption: lots of stuff in here like this if my
Caption: father is not there nothing then we do
Caption: this if our father is there then go on
Caption: and try them so our code is quite
Caption: complex with the whole ball of
Caption: if-then-else statements like if null
Caption: then do this we cannot now all then do
Caption: this same sort of thing if we use this
Caption: mode we can change our code to something
Caption: like this
Caption: remember the my dad handled the nothing
Caption: for it it took the value out and put it
Caption: into the other values so now our code
Caption: would look something like this as you
Caption: notice all the nothing handling is done
Caption: by our moaning and it's actually hidden
Caption: away in an illness text notation for the
Caption: moment I had the bind function here but
Caption: hopefully you can see that code lot
Caption: simpler and in fact we can use some
Caption: syntactic sugar in Haskell to make the
Caption: same codes adjuster syntactic sugar look
Caption: like this and purif Inc of these arrows
Caption: is assignment statements dad becomes the
Caption: father of the person grandfather becomes
Caption: the father of dad this is sort of how
Caption: you would now calculate in the
Caption: functional program the two grandfathers
Caption: the whether stick that looks like
Caption: declarative that's how imperative
Caption: programming it looks like they're
Caption: signing values and doing a little bit of
Caption: a procedure or imperative statements and
Caption: in fact that is what we've basically
Caption: implemented here in the code is a simple
Caption: DSL just for this particular case but
Caption: the important thing is this is pure
Caption: functional code there is no imperative
Caption: code here it just looks like imperative
Caption: code but it's really pure declarative
Caption: functional code that's easy to maintain
Caption: easy to paralyse all those things
Caption: because of the syntactic sugar so that's
Caption: one reason to have my name's it makes
Caption: complex code like this a lot simpler and
Caption: easier to read like this so if factors
Caption: allow us to apply they'll use apply
Caption: functions to values inside our context
Caption: monads allow us to bind
Caption: values into a function that doesn't
Caption: expect values in the data type and
Caption: quite simple structures as I mentioned
Caption: Haskell allows you to do this rather
Caption: than using a function call that allows
Caption: you to use an index no in Sixto tation
Caption: where you put facebook like a + b with
Caption: the operator in the middle so we can use
Caption: this operator for fashion and this
Caption: operator for buyer if you have all this
Caption: quite neat looks like the function here
Caption: is being applied to this so it's sort of
Caption: like just applying the function to these
Caption: contexts even though I can't handle it
Caption: the actual it map function will do the
Caption: work for you
Caption: and over here - mr. buying function here
Caption: we have our data type value mini data
Caption: type we can just feed it into this
Caption: function normally it couldn't handle it
Caption: but the bind function will handle it
Caption: forest and produce a nice result so it
Caption: looks sort of natural and it works quite
Caption: well so why is this important to
Caption: understand the index notation but we
Caption: said that function composition way back
Caption: was our big problem we want to preserve
Caption: this and when we have this bind operator
Caption: we can now do that so if I have my plus
Caption: 3 function and it's plus 3 which
Caption: produces a maybe not just an integer I
Caption: can now write take a value just to put
Caption: it into plus 3 and then put it into
Caption: times 4 and I'll get out just win and
Caption: there's no maybe processing and nothing
Caption: processing in either it's just nice
Caption: simple code but things are inside
Caption: context and even better than that down
Caption: here if we use a different operator
Caption: how's this to an operator called the
Caption: fished operator looks pretty cool you
Caption: can take your function times 4 and apply
Caption: it to top 2 plus 3 and then apply it to
Caption: just 2 and get just 20 just like we
Caption: composed function way back when we
Caption: started two functions compose make
Caption: another function two functions compose
Caption: even though now they're complex
Caption: functions not for simply flat functions
Caption: compose providers so it looks very
Caption: similar to these but all that processing
Caption: is going on in the back and behind the
Caption: scenes we have to worry about it we can
Caption: just write code like this because we've
Caption: got the bind function because maybe it
Caption: was a monad maybe implements the
Caption: interface of the
Caption: hi class so that's pretty interesting
Caption: but even more than that we've got more
Caption: for you today this is what Professor
Caption: Graham Hutton says he said monads are
Caption: one of the most important new ideas in
Caption: programming languages in the last 25
Caption: years that's pretty impressive so I like
Caption: just making our code simpler to use and
Caption: greenback functional composition no they
Caption: do much much more than that
Caption: monads actually make computation first
Caption: class entity the actual process of
Caption: calculating something now becomes
Caption: something you can control in your
Caption: program we've talked about functions
Caption: being first class entities but now the
Caption: idea of a calling a function is now a
Caption: first class anything we can manipulate
Caption: that we can do things before we call
Caption: that that operation and we can do things
Caption: after the operation this is what we did
Caption: with the maybe moaning we provides a
Caption: standard interface for composing and
Caption: sequencing operations remember I said
Caption: that functional programming languages
Caption: and what about C secret seeing the
Caption: recipe and do this after that but
Caption: sometimes we need to sequence things for
Caption: example an input and output you don't
Caption: want to read the input after you've
Caption: written the output wasn't go way around
Caption: so we need to sequence some things in
Caption: our program and monie aids can help us
Caption: do that
Caption: mobile monads also and this is a big one
Caption: hang on to your hats enable computations
Caption: be isolated from side effects and to non
Caption: determinism and thus remain purely
Caption: functional remember we had that problem
Caption: with exceptions you wanted to get away
Caption: from exception so we used length maybe
Caption: we can take that a whole lot further and
Caption: a lot of different side effects can be
Caption: implemented implemented as monads
Caption: ie a data type which implements the bind
Caption: function and does something fancy to
Caption: make our side effects go away
Caption: want to hide the side effect from our
Caption: code and I'll show you some examples we
Caption: talked about this these are the examples
Caption: I'll give you our monads different types
Caption: of monads that implement the bind we saw
Caption: maybe that allows you to do it
Caption: anonymous errors there's another one for
Caption: errors where you have an error code or
Caption: description it'll out the list monad
Caption: allows us to do non determinism return
Caption: multiple values for a function or return
Caption: a random value from the function we do
Caption: input an output that amazing side-effect
Caption: of writing things to the output or
Caption: reading from the input we can do that in
Caption: a Monet to keep it separate malfunction
Caption: Alcoa over here promises and futures
Caption: writing to a log reading configuration
Caption: and global mutable state can be done
Caption: using monads we write a global state
Caption: monad which does some manipulations
Caption: behind the scene so that your particular
Caption: function will have access to some
Caption: readable state can read it and write it
Caption: in a purely functional way not being
Caption: confusing in a traditional approach we
Caption: maintain functional purity right while
Caption: supporting these side effects and it's
Caption: not just side-effects some of these are
Caption: just useful effect you want to do like
Caption: concurrency and so forth remember in
Caption: these are just data types that implement
Caption: the monad which means they implement
Caption: functor and the monad play classes the
Caption: defined function f map and define the
Caption: function bind so here's an example of
Caption: one of these complex ones
Caption: if you want your function to write to a
Caption: log that's a side effect okay so we want
Caption: to have a function which is a normal
Caption: function and normally it would write to
Caption: a log send out a string somewhere a side
Caption: effect the way we can do it is define
Caption: this writer data type and the writer
Caption: data type implements a bind function so
Caption: now when you produce when you have your
Caption: a coming into it it calculates the value
Caption: it today but it also collects the log
Caption: statements and when you now take that
Caption: writer you can now this writer monad you
Caption: can now apply that to the G here because
Caption: the bind function will come along and
Caption: take the value of F of a out put it
Caption: today into G calculate G interface it'll
Caption: take the log out get the log from here
Caption: and appended to the lot so it maintains
Caption: you logged in so the right and longhand
Caption: allows you to have a pure function f
Caption: with log and G with log that actually
Caption: does logging without breaking any of the
Caption: functional programming approach so this
Caption: is a bonus and I think as I mentioned we
Caption: do this with the bind function we define
Caption: a function for the data type writer
Caption: which allows your functions now to write
Caption: to logs in a purely functional way
Caption: remember the outputs are just coming out
Caption: in this data type they're not coming out
Caption: any strange way there's no exceptions or
Caption: logs you're writing to it comes out that
Caption: strange way but our function will look
Caption: normal
Caption: our processing will look normal now the
Caption: big one here particularly in Haskell
Caption: Pascal does its input an output using my
Caption: notes this has been hard to understand
Caption: because the but what are the inputs to a
Caption: program it's sort of like the whole
Caption: world the iron monad is an instance of
Caption: the monad type class which just means it
Caption: implements the bind but if you think
Caption: about it over here we have a get
Caption: character
Caption: what does get character do well it takes
Caption: us input the state of the whole world
Caption: and then it produces as output to your
Caption: program one character from that world
Caption: plus the new what state of the world and
Caption: metaphorically they're going to write a
Caption: character to the world that I write
Caption: something output you're basically taking
Caption: his input the world the state of the
Caption: world and you could have seen that no
Caption: input to your program but you're going
Caption: to send a new world out with that
Caption: character written out there so we think
Caption: about types like this we can define a
Caption: type called IO which is basically just a
Caption: function like this and it's a monad
Caption: function and it allows us to do
Caption: input/output in our program in a purely
Caption: functional way using this particular
Caption: data type called the IO in my name so
Caption: this is how you would actually write a
Caption: main function
Caption: in Haskell to do input and output so
Caption: here we're going to put a string and
Caption: here we're going to get a value from the
Caption: input into your name
Caption: a stream and it looks really pretty much
Caption: like a a imperative program that
Caption: actually has inside effects
Caption: but remember this is not having side
Caption: effects it's fully purely functional
Caption: because bind is doing things behind the
Caption: scenes to make it purely functional so
Caption: basically in our Haskell programs all
Caption: our code is pure functional code but
Caption: there's a thin layer afterwards which is
Caption: basically allowing for these side
Caption: effects to happen this is where the bind
Caption: does its function there are many many
Caption: benefits as of monads as I mentioned
Caption: computation is now a first-class entity
Caption: it captures side effects in these
Caption: algebraic data types enables functions
Caption: to remain pure provides high-level
Caption: abstractions and reduces clutter in our
Caption: code so man adds an amazing thing time
Caption: to reflect on what they are just the
Caption: type class that implements that will
Caption: declines the bind function now there are
Caption: a lot higher abstractions in functional
Caption: plugin as well going further than
Caption: monarchs because one called a monad
Caption: transformer which allows you to layer
Caption: monads on top of each other will do
Caption: exceptions and input/output nothing else
Caption: rather than writing a minor just for
Caption: that you can combine my notes to make a
Caption: high-level monitor as a generalization
Caption: of monads called the arrow and their lot
Caption: other complex instructions that allow
Caption: you to maintain this pure functional
Caption: approach to programming so if you have a
Caption: look in the real world you can do
Caption: real-world applications with Casper
Caption: using pure functions there are web
Caption: frameworks there are database
Caption: applications but now you have to start
Caption: thinking differently you don't think in
Caption: terms of object-oriented class
Caption: hierarchies and dynamic binding and this
Caption: Center to genius collections we think in
Caption: terms of shapes and abstractions and
Caption: there are languages that run on the JVM
Caption: and CLR so you can use this for
Caption: traditional libraries but using a pure
Caption: functional approach so in summary here
Caption: the functional programming paradigm is
Caption: very different than procedural or
Caption: object-oriented hopefully you've got a
Caption: glimpse of understanding it here the
Caption: metaphor is just about simple functions
Caption: processing inputs of giving outputs but
Caption: we can implement parts of the other
Caption: paradigms declarative programs
Caption: exceptions and so forth using these
Caption: monads be careful there are no easy
Caption: equivalents of heterogeneous collections
Caption: inside functional programming there's no
Caption: easier prevalent of implementation
Caption: inheritance so all the nice things you
Caption: get into know a hierarchy you implement
Caption: in your a inherit all the implementation
Caption: that saves us writing code you don't get
Caption: that here because Ollo is supporting
Caption: that approach it has the structures to
Caption: support the inheritance functional
Caption: programming languages have the
Caption: structures to support these monads and
Caption: this approach to programming so there a
Caption: different way don't try and do a low and
Caption: design with a pure functional
Caption: programming language so the question is
Caption: how do you feel now are you confused
Caption: what did you understand some about
Caption: functional programming works maybe
Caption: you're a bit like me you're confused for
Caption: a while but it's not complex honestly
Caption: it's just interfaces and implementing
Caption: terms would approve datatypes if you do
Caption: understand monads then you are a monad
Caption: man okay or later all right
Caption: and great achievement in summary here
Caption: functional programming is the
Caption: declarative programming paradigm that
Caption: uses pure functions no side effects of
Caption: its fundamental construct as many
Caption: benefits makes it easier to write throw
Caption: programs to prove programs to paralyze
Caption: programs we commonly use immutable data
Caption: types and abstract data types and we
Caption: implement things that do those side
Caption: effects using these monads that we don't
Caption: break the functional programming
Caption: paradigm don't your programming is not a
Caption: panacea it has its own problems and
Caption: issues we saw the complexity the
Caption: abstractions the terminology it's a very
Caption: different paradigm than procedural
Caption: object-oriented so it takes a while to
Caption: learn these new paradigms but it does
Caption: have real-world applications as I mean
Caption: to users different approaches it's
Caption: probably going to be the future but I
Caption: probably will take us a while to get
Caption: there we're only get a very early stage
Caption: in our programming skills we're still
Caption: just about home
Caption: and that's the functional approach
Caption: there's a long way to go but we're
Caption: always trying to improve things and get
Caption: better and make our software
Caption: developments better and more efficient
Caption: and more productive a couple of
Caption: reference here if you want to see them
Caption: items the diagrams is a great site ad
Caption: it2 IO
Caption: which has a couple of papers there some
Caption: like wikibooks which explain these
Caption: concepts and codes in detail if you want
Caption: to look at it and learn about them
Caption: thank you very much you haven't got time
Caption: for Q nights I've gone over time so if
Caption: you want to catch me either you can ask
Caption: these new questions thank you very much
Caption: [Applause]